Rick if memory serves the Torino scale
there's more going on than just a number
consequences versus probability zero is
really good and 10 is a really bad day
for the
dinosaurs so recently uh 2024
yr4 has been in the news so it's green
yellow orange red where we want to stay
out of is the red zone of 8 n and 10
because those are the levels where you
certain of an impact and yr4 if it uh if
it misbehaves uh it would go all the way
up to eight on the trino scale that
would be its
maximum this is Star Talk Neil degrass
Tyson your personal astrophysicist got
with me Chuck KN Chuck baby hey what's
happening all right co-host comedian yes
you know what I'm going to talk about
today what oh my gosh go ahead hazardous
asteroids Pluto and Planet 9 so are we
saying that Pluto and Planet 9 are just
now deoa to hazardous asteroids cuz you
know they were a planet you you knocked
them down you know humiliated them
completely you're not over that you
still haven't gotten over that no and
then and then it was like okay you're a
dwarf planet it's like oh at least I get
to be a planet now you're just like you
know what has this
asteroid well while I have some
expertise in the space I don't have all
the expertise I want for this show okay
so we we went back uhoh one of my peeps
okay okay one of my people all right I
got one of my people who invented the
international scale to measure how
hazardous an asteroid will be to life on
Earth okay that is a hell of a like a
quality to have on your resume I'm just
in the business card you know I tell you
whether your ass is fried or not that's
amazing so let me introduce us all yeah
to Rick Benzel hey Professor Richard
binzel Rick how you doing man hey Neil
great to see you Chuck nice to see you
nice to see you yes so you are retired
now professor of planetary Sciences at
MIT which stands for um
Massachusetts uh Institute of Technology
thank you that took you too long to well
you know I was going to say something
smart ass but I you saw me bridling
myself yes you did Bridle you did Bridle
uh and you were in the Center of this
hazardous scale uh hazard scale the
Torino scale we'll get into that in a
moment okay I've got my first question
already all right you're co-investigator
on Osiris Rex uh remind me Rick that was
the mission that did the was that the
one that did the touch and go yes Osiris
Rex was the touch and go that
successfully returned an asteroid sample
to the Earth back to Earth so that's
badass that's more badass we're g to
find out if it had any bugs in it um
and and of course my boy has an asteroid
named after him 2873 binzel and that is
not his password on his accounts okay no
sorry he tells me that's not his
password he's also a staunch Pluto lover
oh really so we had we've had some dust
UPS in our day I could only imagine oh
put your thumb down
dude so we're old friends so we went to
graduate school together oh wow we were
in the same class in graduate school
it's pretty uh pretty cool that's pretty
cool and that was a previous Millennium
too oh yeah way back okay since you were
in school at the same time What was the
most advanced technological equipment
that you had at your disposal when you
were in school cuz that will give people
really I got one for you ready at the
time you were able to visit someone's
house dial a set of numbers to forward
your phone number to their phone number
so that if someone was calling you at
home they could still reach you while
you at your dinner party oh wow so so
that you get your phone number to follow
you how telling that's amazing yeah it's
like it's you have was good you can have
your phone number follow you correct
call you could you're forwarding your
own calls to you correct Rick what do
you have an opinion on this you you
could connect to the from your home you
could connect to the computer on campus
by dialing literally dialing a phone
sticking it into a box that had two ear
muffs to connect your phone receiver so
the handset of the phone yeah a handset
of the phone into a what was called an
acoustic coupler and you could talk to
the computer on campus from your own
home that was amazing that was amazing H
amazing at 300 bod 300 bits per second
yeah oh my God that's
awful we were not streaming videos back
then that's amazing you published a
paper at age 15 I I forgot about that
what what was that paper on it was on
asteroids Neil oh okay he goes back yeah
we we had an experience of a of a camp
run by a Columbia Professor named Joe
Patterson and uh he uh just reached out
to high school kids gave them this in
fantastic uh experience that was
formative in our careers and uh so many
of those students became professors and
professional
astrophysicists um anyway so uh it was a
super opportunity and uh and I haven't
stopped since that was a research
project in that camp that's right that's
right okay so so I attended the same
camp but not at the same time not at the
same time but we didn't know each other
at the time we get into graduate school
and we find out that the two of us plus
another person in our class in that camp
all attended that camp it was an
astronomy Camp called camp
uraniborg Camp uraniborg do you know
what uraniborg is historically I believe
it's the Borg ship the Borg
so when you're when you're on the Borg
ship you're on a borg on a you're on a
you're on a borg when you're on the Borg
ship okay that's a good one that's good
no but that's good uh it was the
observatory of Tu bra oh Tu BR Tu bro
that's your buddy that's my man you like
that he got all the data on the planets
and so it was a camp and we lived
nocturnally we slept during the day and
up during the night it was totally
geeked out we're both 14 or 15 right
yeah exactly so Rick one other thing
about your time in graduate school which
betrays some of your affection for Pluto
is Rick made correct me if I got this
wrong he made the first
measurement of the light dimming of
Pluto's moon going in front of and
behind Pluto so Sharon transiting Pluto
correct and that was the best evidence
available at the time that the moon even
existed amazing and then isn't isn't
that what allowed people to calculate a
true mass for Pluto and and its size and
all this that's right Neil uh when you
have a body in space unless you have
something orbiting around it um you know
you use Kepler's Third Law to to
calculate the mass of the primary of the
mass of the system what's Cap's Third
Law please dude why do we have to
explain that to you just because you
know oh for other people you want other
people to know about no not me I'm just
saying some people might be wondering
what Kepler's Third Law is all right so
Kepler's thirdd Law is a relationship
between the orbital period of um of an
object compared to the mass or the mass
of the primary the mass of the system
and so if you can measure the size of
the orbit and the orbital period you can
calculate the mass of the system we got
the mass for Pluto and was way ler than
people wanted it to be confess that
right now on my show
the the mass of Pluto is what the mass
of Pluto
is let me tell you something Rick you do
great in Congress or
court that put you on Pluto's radar from
from from Jump Street right there so
that so I was not surprised that he
turned out to be a staunch Pluto lover
his whole life because he he birthed
Pluto's mass yeah but by birthing
Pluto's mass you also birth its
demise but go ahead so Neil I was looked
at Pluto for five years years I actually
spent about 10 or 15 years total working
on the Pluto system but we started
looking to see if we could detect this
Moon around Pluto um about 1980 and um
and you know was a fiveyear search of uh
looking for these transits and that
didn't show up until 1985 and then they
were continuing from about 1985 to 1990
uh it's the same technique that we use
for looking at planets around other
stars of course Transit exoplanets but
this was planetary transits and we we
were kind of doing it before it was
popular now Rick I you just reminded me
of something there was a fuzzy photo of
Pluto and there was a little bump on the
edge of the what is the circular outline
uh just fuzzy a little bump and that
that was a hint if we believe the photo
and the Emulsion because back when there
was authentic photographs right right if
we believe that that meant maybe it has
a moon and I just I was just reminded
that not all transits go exactly in
front of the thing you want them to
Transit right so if the angle is wrong
it's you're not going to see to see so
that's why you were looking for it and
you didn't see it for four years because
our sight line to it wasn't properly
oriented yet is that did you know that
at the time what we yeah Neil that's
right I mean what we didn't know is we
didn't know what that angle is or the
inclination of the orbit and so we
didn't know when the earth most of the
motion around um the in this case was
the Earth's motion around the Sun um we
just simply didn't know what the
inclination of the of sheron's orbit
that's what we call the moon today we
didn't know the inclination of sheron's
orbit so we didn't know when it would
become Edge on to the Earth and um you
know but going back to those bumps those
were that was 1978 those were on glass
plates that's when telescopes we didn't
have ccds we didn't have those
electronic detectors yet back in the
day back in the day you had to climb
uphill in the snow both ways to get to
the telescope now that that's when
that's when telescopes here's what you
did you put your head under a
hood damn this old old man hour here
okay so anyway those bumps and those
fuzzy images would move around and it
moved around with about a 6.4 day period
which we knew was the rotation period of
Pluto so it all made sense but you know
we really didn't know it make sure that
it wasn't some funny photographic effect
until we got those transits in 1985 and
those first transits were just along the
top edge of Pluto along the pole of
Pluto and uh so it was the beginning of
a long series of these transits that we
actually used to make the first maps of
Pluto well because you can say how it
dims or brightens as Sharon moves across
it so you get a blunt understanding of
the reflectivity exactly exactly so if
it goes across a dark spot the light
doesn't change very much but suddenly as
the edge of the moon goes across Pluto
and you get a big light drop then you
know there's really high albo spot
underneath very cool high albo Alo I
love that word yes it's it's almost do
you albo I I albo now you just made it
creepy you just made it very
creepy it's it's one it's a fun word
that gives no indication of what it
means that's true right yeah you would
never know what it was tell tell us
about alido Rick albo is a fancy name
for reflectivity you know something with
a low albo doesn't reflect very much
light and something with a high albo
reflects a lot of light so ice is a very
high albo a lump of coal has near zero
albo a few percent yeah a few percent
and and a and a mirror or just a coat of
white paint but have very near 100% albo
all right this is starting to sound very
racist hey Star Talk fans I don't know
if you know this but the audio version
of the podcast actually posts a week in
advance of the video version and you can
get that in Spotify and apple podcast
and most other podcast Outlets that are
out there multiple ways to ingest all
that is Cosmic on Star Talk let me ask
you this a long time ago I read this
article and I mean it was long ago and
it talked about when cuz you just said
reflectivity in albo it talked about how
uh Pluto was so reflective the way it
was that they were able to determine
that that's because it was mostly ice
which means it was a lot smaller than
they actually thought because what you
were seeing was more reflection than you
were actual body if you don't know
anything about a cosmic object orbiting
the Sun you'll make an assumption of
what its albo might be based on other
albos that you have made measured
correct that's right that's right so uh
you you make when you first discover
something you make a best guess that
it's albo or reflectivity and um and
then maybe someday you get the actual
measurements and you can refine it so
what was your first presumption of the
alido of Pluto uh probably around 20 20%
okay okay and so given its brightness
you would say if if it's that bright and
it's only reflecting 20% of the light it
must be this side okay and so now given
that it's has an icy more reflective
surface than previously it's albo jumped
from 20% to what into the 30s maybe up
to 40% okay oh W yeah Factor two almost
yeah so that's a big deal that's a that
that work all right all right by the way
you're in my Pluto book I mention you uh
I don't know if you remember that I
believe the actual words were take that
Rick
let's go back to asteroids uh a big part
of your career has studied asteroids
cool and you were at a conference in
Torino
Italy where you proposed a way to track
how hazardous an asteroid might
be and it came to be known as the Torino
scale which I have a problem with uh
because I understand that there's uh
2873 Benzel okay and that's an asteroid
named after you yeah well why wouldn't
it just be the Benzel scale since you're
the guy that came up with it why so why
so humble man you gota you got to take
it while you can get it okay grab the
Gusto and the glory like you know we
live in a time of trump now man you got
you know what I mean it's it's the best
scale the biggest the most beautiful
scale it's wonderful like you know it
can measure everything it can measure
everything not just asteroids it's used
by plumbers it's used by Carpenters it's
the best like but why why not why call
it the Torino scale and not the Benzel
scale well it is wonderful and it's the
best I love it whoa yeah I'll just say
the tro scale or how we talk about
asteroids is something that we have to
do very internationally and so the fact
that it was adopted in at the conference
in Torino uh you know gave it more of
that International flavor and that my
people all scientists you're all the
same scientists are all always sharing
sharing the
glory and and and and sharing the wealth
with one another and collaborating with
one another don't say that like it's a
bad thing do you know do you know what
world you live in is what I'm
saying no that's fantastic that's I'm
I'm I'm so happy for that that's great
last I read up on this but it's been a
while so forgive me if I misremember
this scale has
multiple factors operating
simultaneously right one of them is the
risk that it will hit Earth and two is
how much damage will it create if it
does o those are combined into this one
scale is that correct consequences
versus probability uh is the basis for
the scale Rick if memory serves the
Torino scale there's more going on than
just a number so so remind me what what
you put into it first of all the trainer
scale is a 10-point scale from 0 to 10
all right Z is really good and 10 is a
really bad day for the dinosaurs yeah
and the way you the way you calculate uh
where an object falls on the Torino
scale depends on the size or the
consequences of what that object would
be if it struck the Earth uh versus the
probability the the currently current
best estimate for the probability that
it could impact the Earth and so it's
two Dimensions consequence and impact
probability and is the scale point at
specific asteroids that are out there or
is it just a generalization for any uh
body that's that might come our way well
it could apply to anything but it really
only matters for objects that asteroids
that have orbits that can come close to
the Earth um if you're in the main belt
between Mars and Jupiter you know it's
you're not going to bother the Earth
you're zero you're zero on the scale
yeah they're zero they're zero oh how
about your the asteroid your name on it
what's the hazard scale for that oh man
zero zero I'm afraid or I'm happy to say
yeah I was going to say because that
would uh you don't want asteroid binzel
come and take at a eight and it's like
okay this whole thing was rigged he
created the scale and now the ACT he's
the one that's going to take us out Tak
us
out that's a Lex luor move right exactly
yeah yeah you know at the lowest level
you know things are green you we have a
green level which means oh this is
normal uh we're going to find a lot of
these um we're currently at that next
level up which is yellow which just says
um these Merit attention by astronomers
so that's what level three is is merits
attention by astronomers and uh if the
probability gets worse we would go to
Orange which means there's a possible
threat here and where we want to stay
out of is the red zone of 8 n and 10
which means uh we have 100% probability
of hitting the Earth and and now it's a
matter of what would be the consequence
quences and those consequences depend on
where the object lands so uh we're in
the yellow zone we'd ra we'd rather be
green um and if we go completely to zero
that's uh that's just colorless that's
just the blank zero and so we expect
this object or the odds are greatly in
our favor we'll get it down to zero we
just have to keep watching it and
refining that track and uh and get the
information we need to to drive it down
to zero so it's green yellow orange red
Four Color mhm correct corre very simple
and zero is no Hazard so that it doesn't
even get a color so recently 2024 y
R4 uh the two letters and then the
numeral has been in the news by the way
it's one of I think tens of thousands of
Earth Crossing asteroids so this was one
happened to be the one to talk about
today okay we saw that it it had a
1.3% chance of hitting us what does that
mean if that number is given when you
discover an asteroid um you know you're
only seeing a tiny piece of the orbit um
as uh as it's moving through space and
so you know we'd like to project forward
uh extrapolate that position um you know
for decades if not centuries into the
future just to make sure that it's not
going to intersect with the Earth and we
do that for every asteroid that's
discovered he didn't say slam into Earth
and kill us all
intersect right it's a very
dispassionate word without a doubt yeah
go on so we do it for every asteroid we
you know every time we discover an
asteroid we'd like to make sure that we
know that one's on the good list and not
on the naughty list and um you know in
this case we know this asteroid in the
year 2032 and in fact every four years
it comes somewhere near the Earth but we
uh find in
2032 um it's going to come uh close to
the Earth probably about as close as the
moon or closer and we simply don't have
enough Precision um in terms of how well
we know where that asteroid is precisely
going to be in 2032 or other decades in
the future to know for sure that it's
going to miss the Earth and so because
we know because we can't say we're
certain it's going to miss it gets a
probability of uh of intersecting the
Earth so that's just simply where we are
it's it's really that that probability
number is really a measure of you know
what we don't know it's not not a
measure what we know it's what we don't
know because we simply haven't been able
to track this thing for very long here's
something that might be new to Chuck
were you able to get a prediscovery
image of this asteroid when we discover
an asteroid that has some future uh
chance of intersecting with the Earth uh
one of the tricks we can do is go back
and see if it's shown up on uh in uh
images that we've taken of asteroid
searches you know many years before
because if we can find it like we that
was someone accidentally saw it four
years ago but didn't measure it um that
gives us another four years of an
orbital length that we can use to
calculate forward and so these are
called prediscovery images and uh I know
people have been searching the records
for prediscovery images to get a longer
track on this asteroid but those haven't
shown up uh the asteroid 2024 yr4 is
simply a pretty small object it's
probably about 5050 meters across
something like U what tunguska Siberia
uh experience in
1908 and you know for the longest time
we never had the capability of even
seeing these objects out in space at
Great distances and it's simply our
capabilities have just gotten so good
that we're starting to see really small
objects far away and so we can you know
start to make these extrapolations
forward um and uh you know this is just
a the first for probably many cases to
come where um our capabilities exceed
the uh know the Precision of computation
so we'll have we'll have lots of these
cases I think coming along so I posted a
a short video in a series that we do
called what's up with that and that's
where my producers say Neil this is in
the news we should what can you tell us
about that I spent 5 or 10 minutes I
commented that when you have an
uncertainty of an asteroid risk of
hitting Earth as time moves on that
uncertainty goes to one of two numbers
it goes to 100% or to zero once you have
a Tighter and Tighter knowledge of its
orbital path and so
recently it jumped from
1.3% to 2 .3% it's on its way towards
100 Rick what's going on protect us and
when do we need Ben
affle no it's Bruce Willis yeah know
your Disaster Movie yes dude well Ben
Affleck was in that movie yes he was but
he wasn't the hero yeah but I like Ben
Affleck okay fine he was Batman don't
confuse him with that well Batman I
wouldn't call to save me from an
asteroid that is for sure that's a
Superman job if ever if ever right right
so so is it is this on its way to 100%
yeah so so Neil as you just said
ultimately when we get the final answer
we'll know it's either 0% or 100% it
either hits you or it misses you and the
odds are greatly in our favor we're
about 50 to one right now that it's
going to miss so I like those odds it
turns out for this asteroid the uh
region of uncertainty um is like this
long spaghetti string that stretches um
from Beyond the moon all basically all
the way across the moon's
orbit um and it happens to part of the
string happens to lie on top of the
earth and so that spaghetti string and
we use Italian pasta because it's the
Torino scale that spaghetti string um
will shrink as we get more and more data
that that improv the track of the
asteroid orbit but until that spaghetti
string shrinks and doesn't have the
Earth underneath a piece of it um we can
see that probability number bounce
bounce around it's there's really no
surprise there um and I'll just say that
ultimately we'll get to the the final
answer and that uncertainty will shrink
to the size of a grain basically a tiny
grain and so the the chances are that
when we shrink that uncertainty region
or that spaghetti string down to a
single grain um that single grain could
be further than the moon it could be
somewhere between the Earth and the moon
but the chances of that grain being on
the Earth are just that few percent okay
but if it is on Earth it the grain could
be on top of hackin sack New Jersey or
Hoboken where you live Hoboken Hoboken
and I um thank you for destroying where
I live often when we think of an
uncertainty I I think of a circle and
there most likely to hit in the middle
of the circle and less likely toward the
edge but what you're saying is given it
orbit and the orientations the circle is
now elongated maybe to an ellipse but
this is a severe ellipse it's so
elliptical that it's a spaghetti strand
that's what you're telling me that's
right what we call the uncertainty
ellipse is really just sort of flattened
out into this very long string it's like
you take pasta and you keep stretching
it and stretching it and this uh this
uncertainty region has just stretched
out into this long spaghetti string yeah
but is is it Linguini or fetuccini no I
thought it was Linguini to start but
it's now getting so thinly stretched out
it's definitely spaghetti um and I don't
think it's quite angel hair past pasta
yet but definitely a spaghetti okay
Torino strikes again yes and and what
sauce is with this I need to know I need
to know what sauce we're putting with
this meal that's a personal choice okay
okay all right so this is 50 meters
across Tusa scale and by the way we
didn't have telescopes monitoring for
killer asteroids in 1908 so this just
hit the atmosphere and exploded on
impact with our air given how fast it's
going right so without these telescopes
if this hit us it would be just another
surprise Air Blast all right but we are
wise astronomers today so my question is
if it does hit Earth is there an easy
rule of thumb for how big a crater a 50
meter asteroid would make yeah it's it's
10 to 20 to one so an object uh that say
one kilometer across would make a crater
about 10 or 20 times that size
fortunately for 2024 y4 it's about 50
meters across and that's right at the
size limit where the atmosphere most
likely will protect us from it ever
reaching the ground it depends on the
entry angle into the atmosphere um you
know as to uh how much resistance the
atmosphere puts up and so in all
likelihood uh this thing will break
apart uh in the atmosphere the pressure
wave will still hit the ground and
that's what causes the the damage and
and what kind of shock wave are we
looking at from you know it's like you
slap the atmosphere and what would kind
of be the result on I'll say a
metropolis but by the way in tunguska it
it incinerated 10,000 square kilometers
of forest oh my so so that was so that
was not just the blast wave that was the
the pulse of of of
energy that showed up as as as photons
as light nice right am am I remembering
this correctly Rick um no mostly it was
wasn't so much heat uh it was mostly the
pressure wave what we call an over
pressure um that would have knocked down
the trees so it was really a flattened
forest for a few few hundred square
miles why am I remembering fire maybe
right at the center but that was fairly
localized most of the damage was just
trees knocked over for a few hundred
square miles I'm going to say that's um
pretty impressive of in terms of a
disaster for a pressure wave
to uh take out how many kilometers of
trees I mean yeah well few 200 square
miles few hundred square miles that's
insane because that's insane you guys
wait you're you're both so C about this
is that's small compared with the
surface area of the earth oh yeah it's
not small compared to Northeast
Philadelphia we had one plane crash and
it took out like three blocks of people
I remember that yeah that was just a
couple a little while ago and I'm just
saying like you're talking about miles
and miles of trees being knocked oh it
is hard flat it's hard to flatten a tree
that is difficult that that's no small
thing well you have to remember most of
the Earth surface is water so this could
uh in in all likelihood if it came to
pass it would be overwater um and
they're very poor coupling between that
pressure wave and the water you wouldn't
want to be in a in a ship underneath
that but that would be prettyy pretty
easy to evacuate so Chuck I'm pretty
sure right my good fellow here yes once
you once the spaghetti uncertainty
shrinks down to a DOT if it's going to
hit Earth we'll know exactly where on
Earth it's going to hit correct recently
our capabilities have become good enough
that you know a small object the size of
a compact car uh can be discovered a few
days or hours before you know if it's on
Terminal approach and you know those
predictions get very well find that they
basically can tell people when to go out
hold your cell phone camera up and see a
streak in the sky and then meteorite
Hunters can again then descend on the
area to try to pick up pieces so uh when
we get you know a precise orbit uh we
can be very specific about where these
things are going to arrive so so that's
a scientist talking there he says when
you know where it's going to arrive get
your camera's ready rather than get your
ass Leave Get out no no we're we're
going to run to you know we these are
the sort of things we run towards you
know we want to get data man we want to
pick up pieces sence this is free stuff
this is free stuff from space free stuff
from
space that's great Mana from heaven
right there you go so Rick where is 2024
y R4 on the trino scale so 2024 yr4
ranks a three on the Torino scale which
means um if it were to strike the Earth
it would be a localized event and I
think the important thing about a three
on the tro scale is it we like to
emphasize that most likely when we get
more data um we'll be able to reduce it
to zero and three is also sort of a of
an alert to astronomers to say let's pay
attention to this object we're not
worried about it no one has panicked
about it but let's get the data and make
sure that it's going to miss and maybe
fund a deflection program I was about to
say I don't want to be M but uh what
what what point on the scale do we have
to do
something and what I mean what's the
number where it's just like hey guys uh
we go to we got to get up there and fix
this eight nine and 10 are the numbers
you don't want on the tro scale because
those are the levels where you are
certain of an impact and yr4 if it uh if
it misbehaves uh it would go all the way
up to eight on the trino scale that
would be its maximum oh because it's not
massive enough to render anybody extinct
and your scale sounds like it's
logarithmic or something right or
exponential the higher the number the
much higher damage it would do right
that's correct which is true that's the
same true with the earthquake scale r
scale exactly you ever wanted one of
your questions on the universe answered
we all have questions about the universe
black holes to quazars quantum
entanglement wormholes there is no end
to the depths of cosmic curiosity
well the entry level of patreon
membership with Star Talk gets you just
that I think it starts at $5 a month you
have access to the question line that
reaches our Cosmic query programming and
not only that we produce a special
Cosmic
queries installment just for patreon
members if you weren't the director of
the Hayden planetarium what do you think
you would be doing what okay but this
have to be another Universe it wouldn't
happen in this universe okay I'd be I'd
be a a songwriter for Broadway musicals
o so that's the entry level and the
perks ascend from there uh there's a
level in fact where we send you a an
autographed copy of one of my latest
books uh right now it's Star Messenger
Cosmic perspectives on civilization and
it's signed with my fancy fountain pen
with purple ink so I invite you to just
check the link below and all of that
money goes to our ability to experiment
with new ways of bringing the universe
down to earth so thank you for those who
have already joined and we welcome
others to participate in this Grand
Adventure of what it is to bring the
universe down to earth as always keep
looking up tell us what's the latest
about a apus uh isn't Osiris Rex
visiting apus yes so apus ties into our
current asteroid story because back in
2004 it was the kind of the same thing
apus got all the way up to four on the
trino scale and uh in this case we were
able to find earlier images of that
asteroid and refine its orbit and rather
quickly um have it go down to zero so uh
so that was the apus was the winner in
terms of the highest ever recorded value
on the trino scale but what that means
or what we found when we pinned down the
or orbit of apus is that on April 13th
of
2029 the asteroid apus is going to come
very close to the Earth but it's going
to safely pass the Earth and um that
safe passage of the earth is at a
distance closer than some of our
orbiting satellites the one out at out
at G geosynchronous distances and so um
this this Stadium siiz asteroid hopus is
going to make a very close approach on
Friday April 13 2029 that Friday means
Nature has a sense of humor and um I've
been uh leading a lot of efforts to try
to figure out how can we scientifically
study the asterid hopus because the
Earth's gravity and the tides that the
Earth exhibits on the moon are going to
tug on that asteroid too and if we can
see how the as responds to the way the
Earth tugs on it we'll be able to
understand how that asteroid is put
together and that's Terra incognita
we've never uh been able to discern how
the inside of an asteroid is put
together what about a giant net is
that like a butterfly net you just go up
there no no no no we we want it to go
past we want it go past so um yeah so
we'll let it go past and we just simply
want to get the most science the most
knowledge we can out of this object you
know you know someday the knowledge of
how these things are put together could
be some of the important most important
knowledge that we've ever uh you know
extracted from uh from a space program
and so uh we we just want to we just
want to get smart so as you monitor the
tital forces on it which would serve to
break it apart right if it stays
together in spite of those title forces
that tells you one thing a lot more
solid and if starts breaking apart it
didn't have much of a matrix to hold it
together it's a crumbly collection of
cookie crumbles cookie crumbles that's
right and if it doesn't care
umus has been around for probably
thousands if not maybe a million years
occasionally whizzing past the Earth um
it's probably come closer than this in
some previous Millennium and uh you know
it it may say oh this Rodeo is not
really that tough of a rodeo and uh it
may just pass by and apus itself may not
care uh too much are they still naming
are you guys still naming Earth Crossing
asteroids that are newly discovered
after gods that
are uh impart death and destruction on
the world because apus is the Egyptian
god of death and darkness I right so is
that still The Habit the tradition uh
there's a lot of different mythical
Traditions but you know for apus it kind
of shows that astronomers have a sense
of humor too okay yeah any any plans to
name one
Trump trump probably has a plan to name
one Trump exactly Osiris Rex went on a
trajectory after the sample return to
intersect apus is that correct that's
right so NASA has approved uh that the
next mission for this Osirus re
spacecraft which is be renamed as Osiris
apex apex is a pus Explorer Wow and so
uh we're repurposing this spacecraft to
go visit apus um the laws of orbital
mechanics and how much propulsion we
have on the spacecraft don't allow us to
get to apus until after it's gone by the
Earth so we're going to kind of get a
sort of an aftershot of apus um after
the Earth does whatever it might do to
the uh to the asteroid you're not going
to touch and go on this one right no we
we'll leave it alone um except maybe at
the very end
oh you might crash into it yeah well
after we made sure where it's going to
go for a long period of time we may uh
kind of touch down let our thrusters
blast the surface to kind of create a
little crater that we can then look into
um but we won't physically touch the
asteroid um but I just want to say that
you know there's really been this
fantastic cooperation with European
Space Agency where they're working on a
mission called ramsis um which would go
to Aus and get there before the asteroid
reaches the Earth and so it could be the
European Space Agency uh giving us a
before look and then NASA's spacecraft
ayus Apex will give us the after look
because there's still a few years in
there the sample that did come back from
the asteroid benu yes what did that
reveal so the reason we went to benu is
it looked like it was a very dark low
albo carbon Rich asteroid and we're
interested in carbon because the stuff
we're made of is you know Carbon we're
all carbon based units and so this was a
chance to go back and look at some of
the original carbon chemistry that made
the planets and ultimately made life and
we have found um that very primitive
carbon chemistry even down to some basic
amino acids that make up the the
structure of proteins and you know
essential for life so so we really have
found sort of the Holy Grail ingredients
of um uh the origins of or the chemistry
that can make life part of that was even
expected though right yes I mean that
that that's what we wanted to find um
and the important thing about bringing
the sample is it was collected in space
it was stored in the vacuum of the
capsule and then you know un retrieved
in pristine laboratory conditions so we
knew everything uh organic that we're
measuring in this sample was intrinsic
to the asteroid to the space material
itself and not something introduced
because it you know the asteroid
meteorite landed in a pond or in the mud
and to pick pick it up out of the mud
and get it to a lab things like that how
does that compare to any other samples
that we have from space it turns out
that um this kind of early carbon
chemistry is extremely rare in the
meteorites that we have on Earth because
most of those it's not very strong
material and the Earth's atmosphere
breaks it apart and incinerates it on
the way down and so it's very hard to
collect this these kind of samples in a
free sample from space and a meteorite
and that's why going and get this
getting this kind of sample was really a
scientific breakthrough so it's implicit
in what you said but I want to make it
explicit these
asteroids hearken from the beginning of
the solar system undisturbed by weather
erosion contamination so they're
perfectly preserved perfectly preserved
is that Fair way to say that Rick yeah I
I like to call asteroids the building
blocks of the planets uh it's the their
leftover Rubble they're leftover pieces
of all the material that went in to make
the planets to make the Earth it's like
Ikea like Ikea furniture that's the
stuff that's left over the building
blocks it's not Furniture it's the
building blocks for
furniture it's been a a bit disassembled
over time because it Clash crashes into
each other out there over millions and
millions of years but the fundamental
pieces are still there so we are all of
a particular handedness of these
molecules for life on Earth but some of
those molecules in a mirror are
perfectly legitimate molecules we just
don't use that version of them right so
but space if there's not something to
pre-select a handedness of the molecule
you might expect it to be 50/50 I mean
and if it's not somebody's got a answer
to that there's something doing some
filtering there something doing
something right something's doing
something so that'd be fun to see that's
pretty cool where the future of this
goes yeah all right so Rick take us out
with Planet 9 what the hell is planet 9
it's a place where I'm doing
fine no it's Cloud n that's Cloud n okay
Pluto is the ninth planet because dwarf
planets are planets too and so got out
that we he got out of that I'm fine I'm
fine with the you know um something else
being out there but the thing that's
called Planet N9 um is uh just some
indications in the data that there may
be something even further out in our
solar system that's been tugging on some
of these other asteroids out there
there's a region out there called the
Kyper belt uh there's lots more
asteroids out Beyond Pluto and um some
irregularities in the distribution of
where all those objects are suggest
there's something out there tugging on
them um it's a little speculative it
could be right it could be wrong but uh
you know when you have an idea you go
out and search and and see if you're
right or wrong you know what would make
better data than that what's that the
object
itself right I mean you're what you're
saying you're seeing all the objects
that it's gravit it's supposed
gravitational field would have
influenced and you're triangulating back
on where this object must be and maybe
how much mass it has and but no one has
spotted the object yet if it's if it's
real right and I think the indication
are it will be something very far away a
little difficult to detect so uh so you
know the jury's set definitely out but
uh you know when you get these ideas you
you put forward forward a hypothesis and
you go out and test it so so that's how
science works in the interest of getting
clicks I'm going to say it's a massive
alien
ship he's not going to agree with that
I'm for sure that's a zero I'm afraid
okay
so Rick I think we're we're done here go
it's been really I'm amazed I had we
haven't done this before uh our show's
been on for quite some time yeah and uh
you demand oh by the way I don't know if
anybody knows when I get a call from CNN
right about something in the solar
system I call Rick I say Rick this is
what I know is it is it enough what do
you know what can I bring to this
conversation super cool so he's my go-to
Planet man I love cuz I was a Galaxy guy
speed dial
[Laughter]
cuz I'm I'm a Galaxy guy a large scale
Universe guy and planets was like a
whole other that's a different species
of astrop that what you know what makes
them different they get to go there nice
right I we don't V you know we're not
going to a black hole or the center of a
galaxy or anything right they get to oh
I wonder what that object is send a
probe it's like so that's that's that's
damn near experimental science nice yeah
and it's a planetary science scientist
you really put yourself on the line
because you can have a hypothesis and
idea and you send the probe there and
you find out you were wrong um but
that's pretty exciting when you're wrong
actually because you have to relearn you
you've gained really great insight for
the things that uh that don't prove to
be uh what you might have expected so
but I love the challenge of being able
to study things that you can go there
and and uh find out if you're right or
wrong for today's Cosmic perspective
it's
clear that among other interesting
points of knowledge wisdom and insight
we've also learned that as a scientist
discovering How the Universe isn't can
be just as valuable to the researcher as
discovering how the universe
is it also works when you're looking for
a
[Music]
job and that is a cosmic perspective
Rick thanks for being on the show man my
pleasure great to be with love to the
family and and uh Chuck yeah always good
to have you man always a pleasure all
right all right this has been Star Talk
the Hazardous asteroid Edition Neil
degrass Tyson your personal
astrophysicist keep looking
[Music]
up all